JULIA:  Our fourth and final talk is by Allison Nelson who's 
going to talk about dissecting a bestseller, the art and science 
of storytelling, which I understand is, when you answer the 
question:  Is there some magical formula for book success?
ALLISON:  So can you guys hear me?
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Not real well.
ALLISON:  All right.  Let's see.  Is my mic working?  Yes.  So 
all right, everyone. Hi, my name is Allison, and I'm going to 
talk today about books, writing, bestsellers and science.  So 
I've talked to some friends and sometimes they tell me, you 
know, I've got this idea for a story.  I want to write a book 
one day.  All these things.  And I ask them, well, why haven't 
you done it?  And they say, well, it's a lot of work.  I don't 
know if it'll be any good.  And I just don't think that it will 
get published.  And you'll hear about all these popular books, 
they get rejected over and over before they finally find 
success, and so it's really discouraging for someone like you 
and I if you have a book and want to publish to say, "I don't 
know if that can happen to me."  Publishers in their minds look 
sort of like this.  So that's discouraging but along came the 
Internet, Kindles, iPads, smartphones, and there's a lot of ways 
that people can access digital content now.  So there are 
services for self-publishing and digital content marketing where 
more people than ever before can get their ideas out into the 
world.  You can publish your work without having to go through 
agents or publishers and that's pretty awesome.  So if you're an 
author or you have some kind of work that you want to publish 
what can you do to get it leg up in the marketplace?
           Well, we have the technology to look at this.  So 
what do you do?  You go to Amazon, one of the top bestsellers -- 
book sellers around.  And what I did was I looked at the top 100 
books on the Kindle store.  The data that I have here is from 
middle of last week.  And one of the things that I noticed when 
I was looking at that top 100 is that there are a lot of 
different genres up there.  There's a lot of things that people 
are interested in, there was everything from literary fiction to 
young adult, so mystery and fantasy.  Since there's a lot of 
people in the world, a lot of people have a lot of different 
interests and it really kind of or encouraged me that whatever 
story you want to tell, there's probably someone out there that 
wants to read it.  So these are the things that I did to get 
this data.  I went and scraped the top 100 with a service called 
import.io, which is super easy and simple, and doing a deeper 
dive on the books themselves, I collected a variety of books to 
analyze, compared them to plaintext files with Calibre and then 
you get to do the fun analysis.  And then some examples of 
simple stuff that I did, and that I'm going to show you how to 
do, too, is you can look at ngrams, collocations, I'm going to 
explain what those are.  And also you can look at word clouds 
and look at most frequent words and themes.  And there's a lot 
of really cool and really easy things that you can do to look at 
your own books and look at other people's books as well.  So 
I've used some Python libraries called nltk and textstat.  Nltk 
is a very popular natural language processing library for Python 
that has a lot of different algorithms and features that you 
should definitely check out.  And if you want to make some super 
simple word clouds that are pretty versatile and pretty cool, 
you can get them from that GitHub down there.  So I'm going to 
go through some basic stats here, stuff that I found, and you 
can look at some more examples on my GitHub or ask me about them 
after the talk.  So some basic things that I've found were, I 
looked at the words in the titles, first of all to say, you 
know, maybe is there some common naming scheme.  I found out 
that people use the words book, novel, and series a lot within 
their bestsellers, which said to me that, you know, people like 
reading books in series.  They want to find out what the next 
chapter in a story is.  
And if you've ever been really invested in a series, then 
whenever the next book comes out, you want to go and get it as 
soon as possible.  So that can really launch an author up the 
ranks, if you've got a lot of people expecting your next work.  
Another thing that I looked at that I thought was kind of cool 
was, there were also some words that I felt like were sort of 
emotionally charged as well.  Never was in four different 
titles. "Love" was in four different titles.  And you look at 
these things and that's just a small selection but it's -- you 
want a title that's evocative of something, that people can 
relate to.  Another thing that I noticed, which was kind of 
impressive to me, was that, if you're already sort of an 
established author, I found out that there are a couple authors 
that have multiple books in the top 100 right now, which is 
pretty impressive.  And you might think well, they're already 
famous authors.  They can do it but maybe I can't.  But what's 
interesting is that there's also, every day, a lot of new 
authors coming and going from the list, self-published, 
traditionally published.  I mean, I have friends of mine that 
are just out of nowhere, they wrote a book and it turned out 
that people really liked it and they made a lot of money and it 
was great.  And, you know, they just did that -- publishing it 
from their own home.  And down here, that's just a simple way 
that I did this up here.  You can get a frequency distribution 
about the words in your titles, your books, et cetera.  A really 
good algorithm.  Also, reviews are important as with any product 
that you buy, you go and look at the reviews.  Here's a graph of 
the reviews for the top 100 books.  As you can see, they're 
mostly, you know, in the four and above star range, which is 
reasonable to expect but I thought it was kind of a cool graph.  
There's one book that didn't have very good reviews but a lot of 
people were still buying it, which, I thought was strange.
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  What was it?
ALLISON:  I mean -- I don't know.  Right at this second but...
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Sorry.
ALLISON:  But I can get back to you later.  Also another thing 
that I noticed that was really interesting is that you can see 
some localized price points around 4.99, 2.99 and 99 cents 
which, if you're going to publish a book, it kind of said to me 
that can, you know, of course, number one, people like cheap 
things.  And Amazon pays out different loyalties based on 
pricing tiers.  So that's another reason people might price in 
this range.  But you can use this info to find out what would be 
a popular price point for your book.  So here's some examples of 
collocations.  They're great, they allow you to see common 
phrases that are seen together and are not seen commonly apart 
and they're super easy to generate with nltk.  So here's some 
collocations for The Girl on the Train which is currently the 
bestseller on Amazon.  If you look at the words in bold, what's 
really cool about this, you can get a general gist of what the 
book is about, without having read the book.  When I look at it 
I see, especially if you look at the words in bold, years ago, 
you see don't remember, police station, went missing.  When I 
look at this I say, this has to do with some kind of mystery.  
Someone went missing.  They're at the police station.  They're 
trying to recount all these different events that happened.  And 
then I went and looked at the book and it actually is pretty 
accurate that, you know, that that's what it's talking about.  
So this is a really useful tool.
           Here's another one for the book:  Outlander.  You can 
see again if you look at standing stones, Clan Mac McKenzie, if 
you look at what these are all about, it was really neat.  
Here's you see the Hobbit.  You see Lonely Mountain, Thorin 
Oakenshield.  And the way this works is, it goes through, breaks 
down the text similar to the search engine talk and it does that 
frequency analysis that I talked to you about before, and you 
want to find ones that occur together and not apart.  So that's 
how it does that.
           So I guess the ending question is:  Can I write a 
bestseller with science?  And not really, yet.  It's not really 
something -- I thought it would be a cool idea.  After my 
research, there's a lot of factors that go into it.  It's not 
really something that you can put a bunch of Legos together, and 
then suddenly a best-selling book comes out but what I did find 
was that there's some really simple and easy tools out for you 
to analyze your books, analyze other books and that can 
definitely give you a leg up on the competition to know what's 
out there.
           There are a couple people doing National Novel 
Generation Month, which is a challenge to generate a novel in a 
month which is super cool.  It's gaining more interest from 
people in the field and with some of the AI research that's 
going on, it really leaves you to wonder:  Will machines write 
our novels in the future, or is our ability to tell a story 
something that makes us uniquely human?  Thank you.

[ Applause ]