JULIA:  Next up we're going to have Nick who's going to push us 
from paradise, adding a remote island alphabet to Wikipedia.
NICK:  Can you hear me okay?  All right.  Can you hear me all 
right again?  All right.  Thanks.  Thanks for waiting for that.  
Hi, my name is Nick Doiron and in real life I work for the 
Museum of Modern Art but I've done some other projects and this 
is some crazy project that I've gotten involved in for one 
laptop for child.  So I got started with this group, the 
Ministry of Education for the Majuro islands.  So Majuro Atoll 
is this group way out in Pacific, if you go from California to 
Hawaii and then out that distance again, you get there.  And you 
get there, and it's this spaghetti string of land out in the 
middle of the Pacific and it's this island paradise.  And at the 
same time this bizarre thing of nature which, I don't know 
enough about geology to tell you how this could exist but it 
definitely does exist and they sent me because they bought a 
thousand laptop per child laptops.  And it's at this De La Sol 
Elementary School (phonetic).  And they had these laptops and 
they run Linux and they wanted to know how we could run Word, 
and PowerPoint, and Excel on them, which we cannot.  So instead 
we had these different alternatives.  We had some teacher 
training, we let the kids try them out?  And it was really just 
set up at a few different schools and the kids really love them. 
 And they're in English, but especially with the younger kids 
you want to have some stuff in their local language.  So I had 
to read up a little bit on their local language which is called 
Marshallese.  So the thing about the Marshallese Language is 
that it has, like, this different alphabet that has been, kind 
of developed over the last hundred years and then they revised 
in the '80s.  Anyways, some words that you can learn in 
Marshallese, Yokwe is like hello, or aloha, and then there are a 
couple of other phrases, “ejeeh ahm moore,” how are you doing, 
and “noonniep” is a mythical creature that eats snapper.  I 
asked if it eats other fish and that was, like, the dumbest 
question.  And then there's this other word, “konnoblok.”  
You'll notice that there are a lot of vowels and commas and 
other letters.  
So there are all these different words that are very hard to 
encode and so they would ask me, we want to do a quiz on these 
laptops where kids would answer questions like, "What are these 
different kinds of fruits" and things like that and the problem 
was that everyone was getting all the answers wrong because 
there's actually two ways of writing the letters.  If you think 
about how characters work, there's the letter and the accent and 
then there's the combined letter.  So people were always getting 
them wrong and so I had to come up come up a string thing that 
would compare it to them, and then whichever answer they had 
would be correct.  It would say that it was correct.  So these 
are all the letters in their alphabet.  One of the issues, as I 
said in the '80s and the '90s, they had a linguist come over.  
They were using like the ene, the Spanish letter with the tilde 
-- and every letter they have an accent there was a secondary 
letter that was okay up until the '80s.  So there was actually 
four different ways that you can type every single letter that 
has an accent in the Marshallese alphabet.  And the way this all 
comes together, this actually comes back to Unicode.  So the 
thing about Unicode is it's kind of like our Rosetta Stone for 
computers.  Every character that can be written from our own 
alphabet to really essential emoji like "kissing cat face" is 
really encoded in this Unicode spec.  And someone yesterday 
talked about how time zones are this fascinating, detailed, 
nerdy political kind of thing that people talk about.  And 
Unicode is very much that way, as well.  There are all sorts of 
conflicts.  North Korea tried to get Kim Jong Il's name in 
there.  And they said no.  And that's why everyone in North 
Korea doesn't like us.  But actually, the Marshal Islands have 
actually what I call the Latvia problem, which means that some 
of their comma letters, they didn't really make them, they 
appropriated them from Latvian.  And so there was some debate 
over the last few years, should, the Marshallese language secede 
from Latvia, and use their own letters?  So now, I have to add 
all these other letters because there's so many ways to type out 
these letters in the Marshallese alphabet.  
And so I started to get emails from them when I started getting 
emails from the web, and I had things like “lxjy,” and there was 
no way that was a Marshallese word.  And it turned out that they 
were using a font that would render if everyone were using the 
Marshallese font.  So they weren't even using Unicode on their 
own internal stuff.  They were using this special font, which I 
asked for it, and I asked, can it work on a Mac and they said I 
don't know.  So really we need ways of putting these unusual 
alphabets onto the web and emails, and more compatible things.  
And Wikipedia has this problem, too.  I mean, I'm just doing is 
this in one place, but Wikipedia needs to be able to do this 
with every language ever or else someone will complain about 
them.  So my question was, is there a solution to this problem 
that we're having.  So Wikipedia has some really good language 
tools if you dig around and one thing that I latched onto was 
the jQuery IME, which was the jQuery plug in, which every time 
you go into the text area, there's a dropdown and it lets you 
select what language you want to type in.  Some of them are 
completely different alphabets and this one is just a keyboard 
mapping where it would add the same letters as the Marshallese 
Marshallese letters, and you'll be able to type on Wikipedia, or 
you can actually have this as a Chrome extension, and you can 
type on the web the way that they're familiar with their font.  
And actually type it in the universally compatible Unicode 
system.  And so I went up and I did a pull request.  And I'm 
sure there are people who haven't contributed to open source 
yet, it's a thrill, it's fascinating and it's an amazing feeling 
when you know that you've put some commits up there in GitHub or 
something and then they merge it into the system, so if you ever 
want to type in Marshallese, you can use this plug-in and it 
actually works.  And it was actually difficult to send stuff up 
to GitHub because I was on a remote island.  When you're an ISP 
and you see something like this in your backyard, and you go, 
"Oh, no."  I'm sending all this stuff off to space.  They had a 
cable or something, but it was really slow, and expensive unless 
I was piggybacking on the Ministry of Education.  And why get 
people on the Internet if they're not on the Internet yet?  I 
mean this is one region that's gone through a lot. World War II 
atomic bomb testing were performed on the Marshallese Islands.  
And global warming, their culture is in threat because their 
island can disappear, or other islands have already been 
irradiated, and it's just this one thing and it's this one 
island that's a problem. But there are so many countries that I 
don't even know about that this problem is a problem.  So it's 
definitely worthwhile to go out there into the world and find 
these places that want to get online and want their language to 
be shared and, like, make it compatible, put it into Unicode and 
try to make it into more things.  So yeah, thanks.