 >> Thank you very much, Katherine. I've
never played 2048, but if I can make a
program do it for me... Then maybe that
would be fun. Let's just wait for that
to show up. Great. So now our next talk
is the talk that was going to be the
first one in this block. It's Daniel
Luxemberg talking about brainwaves on
your computer!

(applause)

 >> Okay. So... I thought we could get a
little more rigorous about the whole
exciting thing. What gets excited when
we get excited? Brains! Excited how?
With electricity. Which we can measure.
So electroencephalography. Electric
brain writing. Also known as EEG, less
creatively. It's a measure of electrical
activity along the scalp that reflects
neural activity, first done with a human
in 1934, and by the 40s was being used
to diagnose epilepsy and probe
underlying brain activity like seizures.
It remains an important tool for
research. This is a Neurosky MindWave.
It's a consumer EEG device, not terribly
sophisticated, but it works.

There we go. That is me. It's a little
more jagged than it usually is.

 (laughter)

What exactly is happening? The cells
inside my head are interacting
synchronously, activating, becoming
excited, if you will, millions of times
all at once. At particular frequencies.
This requires that electrically charged
ions be pushed out of the cells and
these ions repel each other, creating a
wave of charged ions that eventually
reaches the surface of my scalp and can
be detected. I've glossed over some
details. Just know all our heads are
pulsing with electricity at all times.
This pulse happens at particular
frequencies, so detected changes in
charge along the scalp occur at regular
intervals. These intervals can be
measured and recognized, and we get a
pattern. It's multiple overlapping
patterns at different frequencies and
amplitudes, which can be difficult to
untangle. There are purpose built
microchips for this that are part of the
machine. This gives us... Okay.

Activity bands! Oh, right. We have to go
back and forth between the raw and not
raw. Activity bands! This is the
relative amplitude or intensity of
different frequencies. The frequencies
are helpfully labeled with colors. Right
now it looks like the machine thinks I'm
mostly delta. Maybe a little bit of
theta. Let's see if that makes sense.
It's not an exact science.

 (laughter)

Neither is this. This is Neurosky's
proprietary translation of these values,
that they encourage developers to use as
the basis for apps in games and what
have you. It's a little questionable.
But anyway, programming. All of this is
about screens, including this. Which is
enough to get at what we're looking at.
You can actually just -- it's
JavaScript. Or Node.js and says open a
connection and pipe it out. It's super
simple, and that's part of what is
exciting. We open a connection on the
port that the little Neurosky demon
exposes data on as it grabs it from the
Bluetooth connection and pipes it to
standard out. And there it is.

Doot doot doot. So that's great. Now,
slightly longer, we pipe it to a web
socket connection. You'll see why that
happens. Web socket connection, instead,
so that we can beam it down to the
browser and make little graphs. In
addition to making little graphs... Hold
on... Boom! We'll do it again. Uh...
It's pretty much cheating. The
electrical discharge associated with a
blink is actually an artifact caused by
muscle contraction around my eyes. I'd
rather not do it by controlling the
reading of a particular frequency. But
this doesn't seem like the best time to
rely on my ability to control those
levels. To get to a place where EEG
controlled presentations is less risky,
we're going to need better machines.
We'll have them. A company called
Emotive makes something called the
Epoch, which is a bit more expensive.
It's kick started well beyond its
funding goals. The interaction Muse is
another one. Melon, kick started by
thousands of people. I think the kick
starting of these things is neat because
it demonstrates other people are also
excited about them. Most neat of all is
the open BCI project, also kick started,
which is an Open Source machine based on
Arduino. Their headset is more
aggressive looking, but having more
programs to figure out where synchronous
activity is coming from, allowing more
precise correlations between intentional
thoughts and EEG results, enabling
things like... Flying a drone through
a...

 (laughter)

 >> Stop blinking!

 >> You have to blink twice in rapid
succession.

 >> Flying a drone through an obstacle
course of balloons using only your mind.
This is a project by a team at the
University of Minnesota, and what's so
exciting about it to me is that in
addition to being awesome, I can at
least understand how the parts fit
together. It's an elaboration or an
expansion of things that I can already
touch, as opposed to something totally
foreign and magical. And that is what
I'm excited about. The way being able to
program with something like that makes
the subject matter feel closer and more
accessible. I was interested in brains
before I learned to code. I like reading
books about them. This... Certainly
isn't the cutting edge of neuroscience,
but playing around with programming it
gave me a way to make an abstract
interest into an active hobby. I think
the way programming does this is by
training us to think of things, all
sorts of things, in terms of compatible
interfaces. It's capable of connecting
one or more of the same sort of thing.
The interface we get for our electric
brain writer is the same one we get for
other network connections, and this
makes sense to us. We're just piping
data from one thing to another.
Sometimes it's electrical discharge
across the skin of your head, sometimes
it's a web socket. Whatever. This
attitude is incredible. It lends itself
to demystifying things that might seem
obscure or intimidating and gives us
tools to explore and interact with them,
and that's what excites me most about
programming. Thanks!

(applause)
